For some people
it
is. I'm sort of a garrulous
kind of guy, so it doesn't bother me to talk about
it. I enjoy telling some of the stories. Some of
them are a little tough to tell. Some of them are,
you know, I was young and foolish, so I did some
things that if I had a little sense I wouldn't have
done. But I did some other things that I thought
were pretty neat. And the flare shoot's one of
them.
I don't know that you want that on tape, but I'll
tell you that later. Okay. What's your reaction to
some of the, I won't say hype, but some of the, sort
of for our generation, the perception that we have
is mainly through movies like War on the Fourth of
July, Platoon, just the Hollywood image. What's
your... Remember the movie The Deer Hunter? I
think I have seen that. That's a fantasy. It has
nothing to do with what happened over there at all.
What was the movie with...
I can't remember his name. It's a guy who's a leader
of indigenous troops in Cambodia or Laos or
somewhere. Marlon Brando plays the heavy...
Anyway, another fantasy, absolute fantasy.
Platoon, the guy had an axe to grind. He had a point
that he wanted to make, and he had the backing and
the, you know, he was in control of the writing and
direction and production and all that. He made his
point. You try to make it sound like that kind of
stuff happened all the time.
It didn't. It did not. You hear about... On the 4th
of July, I've been told I shouldn't see, so I didn't
bother to see it. But I've heard it's a good movie.
There's a movie called Go Tell the Spartans with
Burt Lancaster that's not quite as bad as The Green
Berets with John Wayne. Although that had some
accurate stuff in it. It was also pretty hyped up.
Go Tell the Spartans was pretty accurate.
There's another one that was pretty accurate. I
can't remember what it was. But in the movie
Platoon, as much as this was this guy's
perspective, he's entitled to his perspective.
There's a scene at a fire base for an LZ of some kind
where it was so real that I could smell it. Sitting
in the movie theater, I could smell it, which is
a... There's some scenes, some smells, some
sights and sounds you never
forget. The scene was of
how they handled the cranes. It was pretty
primitive. Basically, they used oil drums cut in
half with diesel fuel, and they burned it. To this
day, when I see something
like that, I can smell it. That's one of the things
we always used to say, that the language we'd use
was pretty crude, but there are things that get
rough over here. You know, you think you're having
a bad day, say at least you're not a Vietnamese with
that job.
The movies are, in the main, they're just very
narrow. Somebody trying to... to say here's what
my experience was, and if that's real to that
person, that's okay. But it does give a distorted
picture of the whole thing. Do you think it's good
that there is sort of a, I don't even say
resurgence, that there is a lot of Hollywood type
thing? Well, I think they finally, they're
getting a little more realistic about it. It's
just that the people pretty much take the last
thing they see, and this is human nature, it's not
just our culture or anything, and they scrap like
that into everything goes this way. And, you know,
in college, you can even read something within the
covers of a hardcover book. And just because it's
printed nicely and somebody went to the trouble to
put the book together doesn't make it true. So you
have to examine... all different sides of the
question. When you're preparing a scholarly
research, you don't get it all from one volume.
That's plagiarism. You do original research,
and you get different people's points of view.
Because like I said, different people can go
through the same place, same time, and come away
with different perceptions. So I think the
examination is good. I think the more that it's
examined, the more people will find that me lying
was an aberration. Not a matter of policy. We were
not trained to do that. We were told explicitly we
would not kill civilians. You hear about the
inflated body counts? Yeah. May have occurred,
okay? Where I operated, you didn't count,
confirm, kill, unless somebody could touch the
body. Sort of like counting coup. We did not
inflate body count. And I guarantee that. I know
that for a fact. I was at the reports sessions where
the reports went forward. Do you think that was a
lot different? Because that is something that you
do here. Do you think that was different from
another section, say, the ground? Could have
been. But I do know that, remember I told you how few
Americans were killed in the year I was there where
I was?
When we got body count of Vietnamese, of North
Vietnamese, we got a lot, especially working with
the works. We got 50 and 75 and 100 at a time. And one
day, I got eight in one place. And I thought, boy,
the war's really going on right here where I was.
And province-wide that day, we got 400.
And you could touch each body. A friend of mine got
shot down after six months in country and had a
journalism degree and was tagged to be on the
Typhoon, the newspaper for two corps. And, or not,
it's a magazine. So he got called out to every big
action to report it to the Typhoon magazine. And he
went out to one deal one time where There were so
many bodies. You've heard the expression, you
could walk across a field without stepping on the
ground. You could walk across a field without
stepping on the ground. He saw that with his own
eyes. You didn't have to exaggerate. Anybody that
exaggerates has got a personality defect because
the stuff that happened was incredible enough
without having to exaggerate. Little Bobby Beal
was shot down one day. He took 17 rounds in the
aircraft. One of them came up through the floor
between his captain, Army captain in the back
seat's feet, passed through the back of Bob's seat
between his arm and his body, glanced off the map
case that he was resting his arm on, which was
attached to the door, and went up to the top of the
windshield. Didn't touch anybody. 17 rounds,
nobody hit. One round goes to an intake manifold,
which cuts the power, makes the plane incapable of
sustaining flight because they're so heavy. He
was in the mountains. He was at 5,000 feet. He had
time to glide down out of the mountains to an old
abandoned French overgrown strip that has cows
grazing on it. He's calling for help. By the time he
gets down, there's so many aircraft waiting to
help him, there's a traffic jam. There's more
danger of mid-air collisions than there is enemy.
And he builds up speed and buzzes the strip to run
the cows off and then uses that excess speed to turn
around and come in and land. Hits a cow with the
gear, bounces off the cow, and lands. No damage to
the aircraft other than the 17 holes. And they
later on decided, well, in the next 10 years,
somebody else might want to use this strip, so
let's repair it and grade it. And the Army didn't do
anything, anything, over there without checking
for mines first on roads or strips or anything like
that. They found five old mines that the cows had
been grazing around and all that. He didn't hit,
the cows didn't hit, nobody hit. So, I mean, weird
things like that. My flare shoot was a weird deal.
And you don't have to exaggerate. In a book we had to
read for this class, Things That Carry, by Tim
O'Brien, one of the interesting things that he
says is every war story really doesn't have an end.
Do you feel that that is true? Every war story
doesn't have an end? What does he mean by that? Sort
of, um... But it doesn't really always have an
ending, but it kind of... Well... Do you feel like
that for you, or do you think it's something you
live with now, or do you feel like it's something
that's passed? Oh, I see what you're saying. No, I
think I still am affected by some of it. You know,
some World War II veterans had it much rougher than
anybody in Vietnam almost. POWs in Vietnam had it
as rough as anybody. Which, by the way, was another
thing that really set us off, was the way the POWs
were treated, and the way some of our high-profile
people, Jane Fonda, I will see a movie with Jane
Fonda in it. I won't give her a dime of my money in any
way, shape, or form. She is not apologetic for what
she did. Clark Clifford, was it? No, who was it? Who
was the other guy that went over there? former
attorney general. Anyway, people like that, the
people who were protesting the war may have been
cowards, may have had conviction, I don't know.
But people who went over there and consorted with
the enemy
ought not to be citizens of this country,
period. And Jane Fonda's right up there. I mean,
she sat behind an anti-aircraft gun aiming, you
know, showing being filmed or having her picture
taken as if she was aiming at U.S. planes. And she
celebrated the U.S. planes being shot down. Now,
that woman can rot in
hell as far as I'm concerned. I don't think a lot of
my generation knows. I think that they're really
unaware. What... I think that there is so much
literature and so much scholarly research after
so many of the other words. And I feel like this war,
not so much that it was secretive, but there's not a
lot of scholarly or... Well, it was such a black
period in our history that at first it was shoved
under the table. People wanted to ignore it. Then
when it came out that people were going to write
more about it and have sort of a catharsis. A lot of
the writings were from a point of view. They
weren't really historical presentations,
trying to be as accurate in reading the reports and
getting into as much actual detail as possible.
But rather, here's my point of view, and I'm going
to write about this, and that's the way it was.
Fields of Fire by James Webb, have you read that?
One of the toughest books to read. Tough book to
read. But as far as what he wrote about that I
personally knew and that everybody that I knew
that served over there that read it personally
knew, it was 100% accurate. 100% accurate. I mean,
tough book. And yet he may have been writing from
his point of view and in your mind sometimes you
remember things maybe a little more than what
occurred or a little less than what occurred or a
little differently than what occurred. I think I
remember it pretty accurately, but I may not.
Somebody else who was there with me might say, oh,
no, John, that didn't happen that way. Same thing
happens when my fraternity brothers and I get
together and talk about our college days. And
we've got some great stories there, too, but we
remember them differently. Another book, I
bought this book, and it's called Charlie Mike.
And Charlie Mike is what, you know, the phonetic
alphabet, Charlie stands for C and Mike stands for
M. And we would use things like that in lieu of whole
words or ideas. And Charlie Mike means continue to
march. And when you're working with the lurks,
they would call in on the radio and they'd whisper
because they were afraid of getting heard by the
enemy. And they'd describe what they'd heard. And
you could tell by the pitch of their voice when
they're really scared. The pitch gets higher. You
can hear it. I could still hear it. And usually
they'd get scared before there was anything
really to be scared about. And the lieutenant in
the back seat, or the captain in the back seat, who
was controlling this suite, this operation,
would hear what they had to say, and as often as not,
he'd say, Charlie, Mike, please continue to
march. They'd travel during the day, and then
about 4 in the afternoon, They'd try to make sure
they hadn't been observed and find a place to park
for the night and stay there until after sun up the
next morning and start moving out again. These
guys, I mean, that was dangerous work. That was
tough, tough stuff. They had to carry everything
they needed. Water, which is the heaviest thing.
They always carried more ammunition than they
were authorized to carry and more weapons. They
were incredibly strong guys. They'd go out all
painted up, in broad daylight, and it's scary to
run over one of them. And they'd go out there and
look for these guys, and occasionally get in
firefights, just them and a whole herd of North
Vietnamese. And it was tough duty. But this book
was about, written by a major who had been in
Charlie Company's 75th Rangers. And he described
three incidents in that book that occurred in my
province while I was there, two of which involved
me. And you could definitely relate. And I picked
the book up on a whim and had one of those covers with
a guy with bandoliers of ammunition across his
chest, you know, and I thought, God, what a hokey
book this is going to be. And it was. But he related
things in that book that I myself had observed
after a fashion afternoon. He talked about one
part in the book where these guys are running
through the jungle. with the North Vietnamese
chasing them. Well, I had a team get jumped by a
bunch of North Vietnamese and we had moved an
artillery battery out. We blasted the
mountaintop to clear the trees off and created a
fire base and moved some 105 howitzers out there by
helicopter. And so I was calling 105 fire in
between the work team and the North Vietnamese
trying to keep the North Vietnamese off their
backs so they could get to an LZ to get extracted.
And I couldn't see anybody. And these guys, the
lurks, would tell me where my fire was coming by the
shrapnel coming through the trees. And they'd
say, you're getting too close. And I walked
artillery behind them all the way to the LZ, and
they got out. But an incident like that was in the
book, which I thought was fascinating. We enjoyed
working with the lurks. That was good. The
communication was good. The communication was
good. We had good relations with them. They did a
good job and we got, we had a lot of success. Did you
hear any stories from them or anything else about
the tunnels or any? The bunkers? The tunnel rats,
we never, I never experienced any tunnel rats in my
area. You know, the GIs would go down in the
tunnels, and that's scary stuff. I'm a little
claustrophobic. I don't think I would have liked
that at all. But they had, you know, the communists
would put punji stakes in the tunnels, and they
would put snakes and booby traps of all kinds. And
that's not my idea of a good time. I'm glad I was a
pilot.
Another thing in that book... that I thought was
really interesting was, he said it was a war
without rules. It wasn't like a checkerboard
where, one of the analogies, he said it wasn't like
a checkerboard where they move, you move. It was
without rules. Do you think that the United States
was playing it like it had rules and the enemy
wasn't? I feel that way very strongly. Like I said,
we avoided civilian casualties as much as we
could. Even when we bombed the North, we did
everything we could to avoid civilian
casualties. It's going to happen in any war.
Friendly fire is going to happen in any war. We did
our best to avoid it. We did play by the rules. You
should not have those kind of rules. You should not
give your enemy a sanctuary.
We didn't have front line that we could if they
mixed with the civilian population.
I was up one night, and I was asked to put artillery,
8-inch artillery, into a village. And I said,
that's a civilian village. I mean, there's
civilians in there. I'm not going to fire in there.
And they said, no, the civilians have been pulled
out the day before. You're cleared to fire. And I
said, are you sure? And he said, not only am I sure,
but if you look, you're taking tracers off for 6
o'clock, green and white tracers. The enemy used
green and white tracers instead of red. So once I
had that assurance, I put artillery in the
village. But we sweated and sprained to make sure
that there weren't any civilians in there. The
Koreans who fought with us in Vietnam didn't care.
If they took fire from a village, they'd say, we did
it. And if they didn't, tell them they'd line up
their tanks, hub to hub, and drive over the
village. The people better get out of the way. So
yeah, we fought by rules, and war's a tough thing
to... I mean, you've got to have some rules or
you're not a human being anymore. But as far as
sanctuary,
that's silly. And the communists would use
civilians. There was a... I called Ann one time And
then I asked her about it again when I went to Hawaii
to see her. A bus with nothing on it but civilians
was blown up by a command detonated mine. Now that
means that somebody has to punch the trigger. It's
not one that you just run over and it goes off. They
found the wires and everything. The communists
blew up that bus to show that they controlled the
road. They knew who they were killing. They did it
as a matter of policy.
We didn't do that. I asked Ann. I bet you that made
the papers in the States, didn't it? She never
heard of it. Didn't make the papers in the States.
Communists doing atrocities, which they did all
the time as a matter of policy, the press didn't
care about that. Just what the United States did.
And if the United States screws up, the press is
supposed to point it out. I'm not saying they
shouldn't. They shouldn't make it sound like we do
it all the time, and they shouldn't ignore the fact
that the enemy does it. That's one-sided. How many
memories are acknowledged today? Talk about the
Ho Chi Minh Trail, controlling the road. The Ho Chi
Minh Trail was a sign of how incredibly
disciplined the North Vietnamese were. They took
trucks, but not only trucks, but bicycles and
packs. It was like an army of ants going down this
trail. We bombed the trail and they just moved
around where we bombed. It was an incredible back
and forth game. We did have a Chu Hoi in our province
who, when asked why he surrendered, he said, well,
it's like this. He says, I was in North Vietnamese,
minding my own business. I get drafted into the
Army. And he says, you know, all these guys are
going south and none of them are coming back, so I'm
pretty scared. But I'm given a load to take down the
Ho Chi Minh Trail on the back. And he's a bunch of
mortar rounds. And they would start this trail all
the way down from North Vietnam carrying
ammunition, and the fingers went out to all over
South Vietnam. So his finger happened to go down
into my province, Binh Duan Province. He says, I
get down here. I'm months on this trail. I'm
getting bombed. I'm getting rained on. It's
miserable. I get down here. I say, here I am, and
here's my mortar round. And the guy says, all
right, great. Come on down here. And I go down this
trail. The guy sets up a mortar tube, takes my
rounds, fires them off, says, let's get out of
here. We get out. He says, now go get some more. He
says, that's not what I want to do. So he
surrendered. He says, all I'm going to do is be a
pack mule. I'm going to give up. But people gave up
for different reasons. I will tell you, we killed a
lot of Vietnamese. We killed a lot of North
Vietnamese. When I first got there, they could not
mount a serious offensive. Remember, I got there
in May of 69. A year and five months or four months
after Tet of 68, they could still not mount a
serious effort because they were so decimated by
Tet of 68. After I'd been there about six months,
they were getting major North Vietnamese units in
my province. And we killed a lot of them. How did you
feel about, or how did people feel about the age? I
know that they made a lot of children fight. How did
they feel about it? Did they want to? The
communists ruled by fear. They made up a policy of
killing the village leaders and the teachers, the
educated people. This is documented. They would
take them out and kill them in front of the rest of
the village. and say, if you don't do what we say,
this will happen to you. Anybody that resisted
them was shot in front of the rest of the village as a
lesson. They scared most of these people into
serving with them. It wasn't that they were all
that dedicated. A lot of them were scared, and
they'd get killed if they didn't serve, so why not
go ahead and fight and have a chance of living than
not do what they say and get killed.
So that was common practice. practice.
Quite often they'd get children who really didn't
know any better to throw a grenade or something
like that. And because we were so conscious of not
killing civilians, a lot of GIs got killed because
they hesitated, even though they saw a girl or a
child carrying a weapon. They'd hesitate just
long enough For
them to get killed. That's a lot of the pictures you
see. Yeah, a lot. So, you know, sometimes GIs got a
little trigger happy after they've been shot at a
few times by civilians. Or you'd see a civilian
walking down a road and they'd walk like this, do a
little movement around a certain spot, and they
knew the mine was there. And they wouldn't tell the
GIs, hey, there's a mine there. They'd just let
them run over it. If you ever saw any civilian doing
that, you immediately changed your
mind. Anyway. Did you, um, what was probably the
scariest
moment? Well, the night in the mountains. I had no
artificial horizon. It was inoperative. Had no
radio waves navigation. You could tell where I
was. My team was lost and in trouble. We flew into
the valley, and the clouds were below the
mountaintops. And you could tell the mountains
from the clouds because the mountains were a
little blacker. And the ranger in my back seat
said, I think they're over this direction. And he
had me flying up a little finger of the valley that
the sides were closing in. And you get to a point
where you can't turn around and get out without
running into them. We just had a couple of
helicopters hit the mountains and kill everybody
on board recently. And so I was getting a little
antsy, and I said, you know, A, I don't think
they're over here, and B, I'm not flying up this
valley anymore. And we found them 11 kilometers
away and told them where they were and made sure the
radio contact was established and everything was
okay. And like I said, I would fly in and out of
clouds, and all I had to orient myself was my
altimeter and my airspeed indicator and my
turn-and-back indicator. And I can't tell you
today how I got out of there. Ann asked me one time,
what was the scariest thing that ever happened?
Was it the flare shoot? And I said, no, it was the
night in the mountains. And I got all teary because
I just don't know how I got out of there. But the
flare shoot was pretty interesting. was firing a
Stinger gunship, which is an Air Force C-119 with
20mm Vulcan Gatling guns on. A compound of RFPF,
Regional Force Popular Force, like a militia
compound, had been hit. It was right on QL1, which
is the main highway that runs north-south through
Vietnam, or at this point it ran east-west because
of the way the country is organized or outlined.
And so, to the south, from this stretch of the road
was the ocean, and they wouldn't try to get out
there because they're too easily spotted. To the
north were these stream beds that led up to the
mountains to the Triple Canopy Jungle, and that's
the way they would logically go. So I was flying at
about 1,000 feet above the ground. The gunship was
flying at 4,000 feet above the ground, and he was
kicking flares out. I was flying in a racetrack
south of the highway, and he was flying north of the
highway in a racetrack. And I could see the ground,
and I could actually adjust his fire into these
screen beds. And I don't know if we got anybody, but
that's the only thing you can do. Well, a dust-off
helicopter, medical evacuation helicopter,
came into the compound to pick up the wounded, and
on another frequency asked for another flare. So
unbeknownst to me, as I'm looking down at the
ground, this guy flies, does a little jog, and
kicks out another flare over the compound. So I'm
flying heading east and looking out to the right at
the ground north of the highway. And I look up and
come to see a white blur in front of my nose. And what
had happened was this flare had burned out. All the
flares were burning out above my altitude. But as
long as they were north of the highway, the wind was
blowing them to the west. I'm sorry, the wind was
blowing them to the east. I was flying west.
They were out of my way. But on this one, it was right
in front of me. And it was one of those instant
recognition things. I knew what it was. And I
jammed rudder and aileron and turned my head like
this, sort of like a flinch when you know you're
going to hit something. And if it had hit my prop, it
would have been all over. But it hit my left wing.
And the way these things are, they're a... 16-foot
diameter canopy parachute with shroud lines go
down to a ring with a quarter-inch thick steel
cable from which hangs a big canister, rubberized
canister that burns. And that's what creates this
flare. And so I went like this, and apparently what
happened was the thing went over the top of the wing
that the parachute did, and ballooned or like a big
air brake, and it snapped me to the left. At the same
time, I heard this loud wham, and that was a
canister swinging up underneath it, hitting the
underside of the wing and left a dent about that,
about three inches deep under the underside of the
wing. And when I snapped to the left, I thought I'd
lost a wing. And I jammed more rudder and looked
over and saw that what I had was this big air brake.
So I got it by holding all the rudder I could. My
right leg was working like mad, I got it flying
straight. And it slowed me down from my normal 90
knots to 70. And yet at that speed, it's like...